---
title: Who uses Carbon?
description:
  Carbon is for all members of a cross-functional product team—designers,
  developers, marketers and offering managers. Every point along a user's
  journey needs to feel part of a holistic, branded experience—that's where
  Carbon comes in.
---

<PageDescription>

Carbon is for each and every member of a cross-functional team—designers,
developers, marketers and offering managers. Every point along a user's journey
needs to feel part of a holistic, branded experience and that's where Carbon
comes in.

</PageDescription>

<AnchorLinks>

<AnchorLink>Designers</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Developers</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Marketers</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Product managers</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Sales</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Support</AnchorLink>

</AnchorLinks>

## Designers

Designers are passionate advocates for users, and Carbon helps them provide
value to our users with accessible, fully-tested assets and guidance that
designers can rely on to create cohesive experiences that are in line with other
business units.

### How Carbon helps designers

Carbon supports designers with the tools to build excellent experiences for our
users that are consistent, delightful, and thoughtful. Designers can quickly
create tailored solutions for our clients, drawing on Carbon's reusable kit of
parts. This saves valuable time that can be spent on innovating new solutions.

In addition, Carbon enables product and .com designers across the organization
to explore and deliver the full potential of a design, leveraging the work of
other teams where possible, avoiding redesign and duplication of efforts,
keeping the focus on the distinct client use cases.

Here are some ways designers can begin engaging with Carbon.

#### Learn the system

- Familiarize yourself with the Carbon
  [foundational elements](/guidelines/2x-grid/overview), their usage
  documentation, and the system's
  [design principles](https://www.ibm.com/design/language/).

- Familiarize yourself with usage and style guidance for all of Carbon's
  [components](/components/overview/) and [patterns](/patterns/overview/).

- Check out [design tutorials](/designing/tutorials/) to learn more about some
  of the foundational pieces of the design system.

#### Get the tools

- Visit the [Get started](/designing/get-started/) page to install the Figma
  design kits.

- Visit the [Other resources](/designing/design-resources/) page to find other
  useful tools and plugins.

#### Connect with the team

- Find [meetups](/whats-happening/meetups/) for leveling up your skills,
  connecting with your peers, and getting reviews on work in progress.

- If you're confused or if you've spotted an inconsistency, reach out on our IBM
  Slack channels. At this time, the Slack channels are for IBMers only.

  - [#carbon-design-system](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/messages/C0M053VPT/)
  - [#carbon-react](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/C2K6RFJ1G)
  - [#carbon-web-components](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/CL83LMKSA)

- Make a [GitHub issue](/contributing/bugs-and-requests/) when you find a bug or
  want to request a feature.

#### Keep up with the latest

- Stay up to date with Carbon's
  [enhancements roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/carbon-design-system/projects/51/views/1).

- See what issues are being tackled
  [right now](https://github.com/orgs/carbon-design-system/projects/39/views/87).

#### Contribute back to Carbon

- [Contribute](/contributing/overview/) component and/or pattern enhancements,
  or create new assets, stewarded by the Carbon team.

- Author usage documentation for [patterns](/contributing/pattern/) and
  [components](/contributing/component/).

- Create tooling, especially as related to design kits in various frameworks.

- Explore scalable system logic such as token additions or inline theming.

- Connect with the Carbon team to share work in progress and assess its
  suitability for universal guidance.

## Developers

Carbon provides developers with the tools they need to build more product in
less time, while saving them from the mind-numbing work of creating the same
base components over and over again.

### How Carbon helps developers

By leveraging Carbon's pre-built assets, developers free themselves (and their
backlogs) up to do the innovative work that inspires them and ultimately
elevates the user experience for our clients.

Developers can create products that are cohesive with other business
units—high-quality, consistent, and robust front-end experiences that share the
IBM brand.

Here are some ways developers can begin engaging with Carbon.

#### Learn the system

- Familiarize yourself with the
  [Carbon foundational elements](/guidelines/2x-grid/overview/), the usage
  documentation, and the system's
  [design principles](https://www.ibm.com/design/language/).

- Check out a tutorial in your framework of choice
  ([React](/developing/react-tutorial/overview/),
  [Angular (community)](/developing/angular-tutorial/overview/) or
  [Vue (community)](/developing/vue-tutorial/overview/)).

#### Get the tools

- Visit [Developing > Get started](/developing/get-started/) and install your
  framework of choice.

- Visit [Developer resources](/developing/dev-resources/) to find Carbon tools,
  as well as our GitHub repos and Storybooks for your framework of choice.

#### Connect with the team

- Find [meetups](/whats-happening/meetups/) for leveling up your skills,
  connecting with your peers, and getting reviews on work in progress.

- If you're confused or if you've spotted an inconsistency, reach out on our IBM
  Slack channels. At this time, the Slack channels are for IBMers only.

  - [#carbon-design-system](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/messages/C0M053VPT/)
  - [#carbon-react](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/C2K6RFJ1G)
  - [#carbon-web-components](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/CL83LMKSA)
  - [#carbon-charts](https://peretz.slack.com/archives/CCA7L4MS9)
  - [#carbon-tutorial](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/CJUGA7P6H)
  - [#carbon-ng (community)](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/CBZC0LM2N)
  - [#carbon-vue (community)](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/CAM5P6NR1)

- Make a [GitHub issue](/contributing/bugs-and-requests/) when you find a bug or
  want to request a feature.

#### Keep up with the latest

- Stay up to date with Carbon's
  [enhancements roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/carbon-design-system/projects/51/views/1).

- See what issues are being tackled
  [right now](https://github.com/orgs/carbon-design-system/projects/39/views/87).

#### Contribute back to Carbon

- [Contribute](/contributing/overview) component and pattern enhancements or
  create new assets, stewarded by the Carbon team.

- Author developer documentation for patterns and components.

- Create any relevant tooling to help developers within your PAL community or
  the wider community build more efficiently with Carbon.

- As you learn and grow give back to the community in the support channels.

## Marketers

Carbon allows teams to build excellent experiences that differentiate IBM from
the competition.

Products and experiences built with Carbon provide an interoperability of
experience and visuals across products. More complex multiproduct stories are
easier to tell when product experiences are in lock step.

Here are some ways marketers can begin engaging with Carbon:

- Visit [IBM Brand Center](https://www.ibm.com/brand) to learn more about
  foundational brand compliance, as well as for the hero brand systems that
  drive IBM's portfolio of products and experiences.

- The majority of marketing experiences use Carbon web components. Visit
  [Carbon for IBM.com](https://www.ibm.com/standards/web/carbon-for-ibm-dotcom/)
  to ensure that these experiences are adhering to Carbon guidance.

- Familiarize yourself with
  [IBM.com web standards](https://www.ibm.com/standards/web/) to assess the
  legal compliance of your experience.

- Make sure all digital experiences by third parties meet IBM-A accessibility
  requirements:

  - [Marketing materials](https://www.ibm.com/able/toolkit/launch/readiness#marketing-materials)
  - [Supplier and Partnership Accessibility Requirements and Process](http://ibm.biz/SupplierAccessibility)
  - [Accessibility guidelines for suppliers](http://blob:https//www.ibm.com/c4c955b3-b746-c74c-86de-c852f7f1462a)

## Product managers

Carbon accelerates team productivity and time to market. It improves business
outcomes such as increased lifetime value, revenue, NPS, and decreased churn.
Teams using Carbon have also won awards in both the
[product](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cdai-design/awards) and the
[digital](https://medium.com/design-ibm/ibm-cloud-app-id-and-assist-me-win-indigo-design-awards-47600197f780)
realms.

Here are some ways product managers can begin engaging with Carbon:

- Stay current with Carbon's [releases and roadmap](/whats-happening/releases/)
  to prioritize upgrading Carbon's new assets, upstream fixes,
  designer/developer workflow improvements, and tooling enhancements.

- Provide the Carbon team with adoption and migration feedback, as well as
  measured product performance with regard to Carbon, providing a healthy
  collaboration loop. Here are some
  [migration worksheets and other resources](https://pages.github.ibm.com/cdai-design/dux/).

## Sales

Multiproduct stories are easier to tell and sell when product experiences work
together seamlessly. Suites of products built on the same foundation, that have
the same interactions are a dream to demo.

Carbon also extends
[IBM iX's capabilities](https://blog.adobe.com/en/publish/2019/11/04/adobe-and-ibm-ix-extend-partnership-to-help-enterprises-design-powerful-and-consistent-customer-experiences.html#gs.101gaxd),
allowing iX customers to implement and customize Carbon, showcasing its
adaptability as a white-label design system.

Here are some ways people in sales can begin engaging with Carbon:

- Consultants who are selling digital solutions to clients should understand the
  benefits of Carbon for rapid prototyping, demo'ing and building.

- Our IBM consultants are the champions of third party Carbon use. Carbon looks
  to them for the following:

  - Creating case studies that highlight the effective use and benefits of
    Carbon.
  - Providing information about gaps in third party capabilities, as well as
    prioritized client requests.

- Stay up to date with Carbon's
  [roadmap and releases](/whats-happening/releases/).

## Support

Product experiences that are built on the same foundation and work together
seamlessly to reduce cognitive load for users, thereby reducing user errors and
questions, and significantly reducing the need for support.

Consistent experiences also result in less need for extensive training and
onboarding resources; learning can be leveraged across multiple spaces.

Here are some ways people in support roles can begin engaging with Carbon:

- Stay up to date with Carbon's
  [roadmap and releases](/whats-happening/releases/).

- Make a [GitHub issue](/contributing/bugs-and-requests/) to report bugs or
  address gaps.

- Report issues in these primary support Slack channels:
  - [#carbon-design-system](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/messages/C0M053VPT/)
  - [#carbon-components](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/C046Y0YUD)
  - [#carbon-react](https://ibm-studios.slack.com/archives/C2K6RFJ1G)
