---
title: Flow & Relationship Charts
description:
  Uncover intricate data relationships and flows, providing valuable insights
  into complex data sets.
---

import {
  complexChartDemoGroups,
  getDemoGroupByTitle,
} from '../../../data/data-visualization';

import { AnchorLinks, AnchorLink } from 'gatsby-theme-carbon';
import ChartDemoGroup from '../../../components/data-visualization/ChartDemoGroup.js';

<PageDescription>

Uncover intricate data relationships and flows, providing valuable insights into
complex data sets.

</PageDescription>

<InlineNotification>

**Note:** Some of the charts below are not included in the carbon-charts
repository yet. To see our roadmap, make feature requests, or contribute, please
go to the
[carbon-charts repository](https://github.com/carbon-design-system/carbon-charts).

</InlineNotification>

<AnchorLinks>
  <AnchorLink>Alluvial/sankey diagrams</AnchorLink>
  <AnchorLink>Heat maps</AnchorLink>
  <AnchorLink>Network diagrams</AnchorLink>
  <AnchorLink>Parallel coordinates</AnchorLink>
  <AnchorLink>Tree diagrams</AnchorLink>
</AnchorLinks>

## Alluvial/sankey diagrams

Alluvial, or Sankey diagrams, are a type flow diagram designed to show two
indicators of a dataset and how records distribute among them, highlighting
correlations.

Multiple blocks of two indicators can be placed next to each other creating a
wider alluvial diagram but it’s crucial to consider that this specific kind of
chart does not show correlations between indicators that are not directly
connected. This is usually emphasized using a different set of colors for each
block.

<div>
  <ChartDemoGroup demoGroup={getDemoGroupByTitle('alluvial')} light={true} />
</div>

## Heat maps

A heat map is a two-dimensional visualization in which individual values
contained in a matrix are represented as colors. This technique makes it easy to
visualize complex data at a glance. When it comes to heat maps, the most common
color ranges are expressed in either sequential and diverging color scales
according to the type of data represented.

#### Sequential scales

Sequential scales use a blended progression, typically of a single color, from
the lowest contrast to the highest contrast values, representing lows to highs.
It’s best practice to use a sequential scale with values that are all positive
or all negative. Sequential heat maps can leverage the full range of the palette
(from 10–100) to maximize contrast. Please note that the 3:1 minimum contrast
requirement does not apply to heat maps.

<ChartDemoGroup demoGroup={getDemoGroupByTitle('heatmap')} light={true} />

<Caption>
  When cells get extremely small, a white border can hinder the intended effect.
</Caption>

#### Heat map behaviors

Axis ticks and legend can be used to leverage the chart potential giving the
users additional information and dedicated kinds of interaction.

<Row>
<Column  colLg={4} colMd={4} colSm={4} >

![Heat map hover detail](images/04a_adv_heatmap_detail_288.png)

<Caption>Exploration of a domain axis hover behavior</Caption>

</Column>
</Row>

#### Divergent scales

Diverging scales show color progression in two directions: dialing down the
contrast of the first hue from one end to a neutral color at the midpoint, then
increasing the contrast of the second hue to the other end of the scale. The
neutral midpoint is often referred to as the "inflection point" (for example, a
0 value midway between -100 and +100).

[Divergent scales](/data-visualization/color-palettes#diverging-palettes)
require three colors for their correspondent values (min, max, and inflection
point) and Carbon has provided two approved palettes for divergent
visualizations. Although the examples here use the "discrete" (stepped scale)
provided by the Carbon palette, divergent heat maps often leverage "continuous"
values (gradients) to accommodate situations that require more than 10 values.

#### Inflection points

While min/max values can be automatically detected from data, inflection points
can vary depending on data type. We default to zero in order to accommodate the
most common cases and include a feature flag within the code to specify
exceptions. The data for a divergent heat map does not need to be symmetrical on
either side of the inflection point. For example, the data set could have a zero
value between -20 and +100 as well.

## Network diagrams

A network diagram is a way of visually representing network architecture. It
maps out network structure with a variety of icons and connecting lines. It’s
ideal for sharing the layout of a network because the visual presentation makes
it easier for users to understand complex connections at a glance. These
diagrams are especially useful for isolating problems or when designing a new
system.

### Building blocks

Carbon Charts offers building blocks for network diagrams in the form of
**React** & **Angular** components.

Note that Carbon Charts does not provide layouts for diagrams. You can utilize
these components alongside graphing libraries (such as elkjs), or by composing
your own layouts.

**Getting started guides:**

- [React](https://carbon-design-system.github.io/carbon-charts/react/?path=/story/diagrams--start-here)
- [Angular](https://carbon-design-system.github.io/carbon-charts/angular/?path=/story/diagrams--start-here)

Here's an example using elkjs in react

<iframe
  src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/carbon-charts-react-elkjs-diagram-b9xyp?fontsize=14&hidenavigation=1&theme=dark"
  style="width:100%; height:500px; border:0; border-radius: 4px; overflow:hidden;"
  style={{
    width: '100%',
    height: '500px',
    border: '0',
    borderRadius: '4px',
    overflow: 'hidden',
  }}
  title="carbon-charts-react-elkjs-diagram"
  allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
  sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
></iframe>

<Row>
<Column  colLg={12} colMd={8} colSm={4} >

![Network diagram swimlane graph, organic view](images/06_adv_tree_928.png)

<Caption>Example of a network diagram in a swimlane graph from QRadar</Caption>

</Column>
</Row>

### Node types

This specific network diagram is comprised of parent and child nodes. In the
QRadar example, parent nodes convey the story of what happened in an
investigation and can be clustered based on relationship type. Child nodes
appear under parent nodes and can also be clustered.

Network diagrams use the same scale controls that apply to the rest of the data
visualization components, however they appear in a floating tile, enabling the
user to zoom and pan simultaneously. It’s also helpful to include the expand and
collapse all nodes feature, which gives users the ability to easily navigate
between detailed and high-level views of the diagram.

<Row>
<Column  colLg={4} colMd={4} colSm={4} >

![Floating zoom and pan detail](images/07_adv_tree_detail_288.png)

<Caption>Detail of floating zoom and pan functionality</Caption>

</Column>

<Column  colLg={4} colMd={4} colSm={4} >

![Child nodes detail](images/08_adv_tree_detail_288.png)

<Caption>
  Detail of child nodes clustered underneath master parent cluster
</Caption>

</Column>
</Row>

## Parallel coordinates

Parallel coordinate charts visualize individual data elements across multiple
variables. Each variable corresponds to a vertical axis and each data element is
displayed as a series of connected points along the axes.

The parallel coordinate chart is the equivalent of a radar chart with axes —
making it preferable for many use cases. Its strength is that each variable can
be completely different and even have its own scale (the units can even be
different).

<Row>
<Column  colLg={12} colMd={8} colSm={4} >

![Parallel coordinate plot](images/new_adv_parallel_928.png)

</Column>
</Row>

### Parallel coordinate behaviors

Hover effects that highlight a specific group or axis can be added to enhance
basic parallel coordinate charts. These charts can also include interactive
features like the brush component. By clicking and dragging along any axis, you
can specify a filter for that dimension. The brush component is also used in the
updated scatterplot matrix example. See the detail below.

<Row>
<Column  colLg={4} colMd={4} colSm={4} >

![Brush component detail](images/new_adv_parallel_detail_01_288.png)

<Caption>Detail of brush component behavior</Caption>

</Column>

<Column  colLg={4} colMd={4} colSm={4} >

![Tooltip detail](images/new_adv_parallel_detail_02_288.png)

<Caption>Detail of a comparative tooltip interaction on hover</Caption>

</Column>
</Row>

## Tree diagrams

Carbon Charts supports both tree diagrams and dendrograms. Although the two are
very similar, dendrograms tend to offer a more responsive layout for varying
screen sizes.

<div>
  <ChartDemoGroup demoGroup={getDemoGroupByTitle('tree')} light={true} />
</div>
